vl BIOGRAPHICAL sKETOH OF CAESAR

try in a condition in which further bloodshed was
almost or quite inevitably a question of time. The
conflict came as Caesar's ten years as governor of

Gaul were drawing to a close, and, whatever opin-
ion one may hold as to Caesar’s share of responsi-
bility for the war, it is impossible to doubt that
his victory was in the interests both of Rome and
of the after-world. The reforms he introduced into
the constitution and administration of the Roman
state prove him to have been among the very great-
est statesmen who have ever lived.

That Caesar was also an orator and a writer with
few equale, of his own time or any other, is amply
shown by Cicero's praise of him, and by such of
his writings (seven books upon the Gallio War and
three upon the Civil War) as have come down to
us. A lost work on grammatical subjecta, and his
reform of the calendar bringing it practically into
the shape in which we still use it, show the variety
of studies for which he found time in the midst of
his varied and crowded career.

He was not yet fiftyeight years old when he was
assassinated on the 15th of March, 44 Β. c. In
spite of attacks upon his private character such as
all great men are exposed to, the balance of evi-
dence points to the conclusion that morally Cacsar
stood distinctly above the great majority of his
contemporaries, and could even bear comparison

with the average man of today.

 

